Intro grype (#1624)
chainguard-dev/edu: content/chainguard/chainguard-images/working-with-images/scanners/grype-tutorial/index.md

---

> title: "Using the grype Container Scanner"

Author: I like it. I'm going to leave grype lower case since they're pretty into their lower case stuff and consistent about it. Admittedly kind of painful to write when starting sentences. Final title:

Using grype to Scan Container Images for Vulnerabilities

type: "article"
linktitle: "grype-tutorial"
aliases: 
- /chainguard/chainguard-images/working-with-images/scanners/grype-tutorial
description: "Learn to use grype to detect CVEs in images"
date: 2024-06-06:08:00+02:00
lastmod: 2024-06-06:08:00+00:00
tags: ["Conceptual", "CVE"]
draft: false
images: []
menu:
  docs:

>     parent: "scanners"

Author: Minimum three, possibly more. If it winds up being fewer we might unpack it and move it up. For now I think it makes sense to have a folder.

>     parent: "scanners"

Reviewer: cool! Looking forward to seeing the other entries. Folder works for me :+1:

weight: 100
toc: true
---

> [grype](https://github.com/anchore/grype) is a vulnerability scanner for container images and filesystems developed and maintained by [Anchore](https://anchore.com/) and written in the Go programming language. grype can scan from Docker, OCI, Singularity, podman, image archives, and local directory. grype is compatible with SBOMs generated by [syft](https://github.com/anchore/syft), and grype's [vulnerability database](https://github.com/anchore/grype-db) draws from a wide variety of sources, including [Wolfi SecDB]( https://github.com/wolfi-dev/wolfictl/blob/main/docs/cmd/wolfictl_advisory_secdb.md).

Author: Hm, my read on the project is that they are going for lower case, their title in the project is lower case, and I do broadly feel like we should try to respect their choice. I agree that they're not always the best about it themselves, but reading between the lines I do think they try to be lower case, you see it lower case where it would be capitalized in their blogs and such. I do find this kind of painful, since it looks a bit ugly at the start of sentences, but I think it's most correct, and our style says to spell projects the weird way they want to be spelled (I think). Open to more pushback here, though, let me know what you think.

> [grype](https://github.com/anchore/grype) is a vulnerability scanner for container images and filesystems developed and maintained by [Anchore](https://anchore.com/) and written in the Go programming language. grype can scan from Docker, OCI, Singularity, podman, image archives, and local directory. grype is compatible with SBOMs generated by [syft](https://github.com/anchore/syft), and grype's [vulnerability database](https://github.com/anchore/grype-db) draws from a wide variety of sources, including [Wolfi SecDB]( https://github.com/wolfi-dev/wolfictl/blob/main/docs/cmd/wolfictl_advisory_secdb.md).

Reviewer: Well, I dug a little deeper and, to your point, I found at least three blog posts where they consistently capitalize the project names:
* [ex. 1](https://anchore.com/blog/say-goodbye-to-false-positives/)
* [ex. 2](https://anchore.com/blog/finding-and-fixing-the-jsonwebtoken-vulnerabilities/)
* [ex. 3](https://anchore.com/blog/four-years-of-syft-development-in-4-minutes-at-4k/) (this example is mostly Syft but the same point applies)

so :shrug: it seems to me like the GH project is what's out of line with their style guide and I'm inclined to push back more. But we can also throw the question to the team if you aren't convinced

> [grype](https://github.com/anchore/grype) is a vulnerability scanner for container images and filesystems developed and maintained by [Anchore](https://anchore.com/) and written in the Go programming language. grype can scan from Docker, OCI, Singularity, podman, image archives, and local directory. grype is compatible with SBOMs generated by [syft](https://github.com/anchore/syft), and grype's [vulnerability database](https://github.com/anchore/grype-db) draws from a wide variety of sources, including [Wolfi SecDB]( https://github.com/wolfi-dev/wolfictl/blob/main/docs/cmd/wolfictl_advisory_secdb.md).

Author: No, this is evidence enough. Kind of annoying that they're that inconsistent. I'll swap them out, thanks for taking the time to dig up the posts! Honestly it will make it look better, the lower case looks kind of stupid.

> [grype](https://github.com/anchore/grype) is a vulnerability scanner for container images and filesystems developed and maintained by [Anchore](https://anchore.com/) and written in the Go programming language. grype can scan from Docker, OCI, Singularity, podman, image archives, and local directory. grype is compatible with SBOMs generated by [syft](https://github.com/anchore/syft), and grype's [vulnerability database](https://github.com/anchore/grype-db) draws from a wide variety of sources, including [Wolfi SecDB]( https://github.com/wolfi-dev/wolfictl/blob/main/docs/cmd/wolfictl_advisory_secdb.md).

Author: OK, now I'm semantically satiated on the word Grype, but the deed is done. Ditto for Syft.

> grype is appropriate for one-off detection for manual CVE mitigation and in automated use in CI pipelines. Chainguard maintains a [low-to-no CVE Chainguard Image for grype](https://edu.chainguard.dev/chainguard/chainguard-images/reference/grype/) based on our lightweight Wolfi distribution.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
grype is appropriate for one-off detection for manual CVE mitigation and in automated use in CI pipelines. Chainguard maintains a [low-to-no CVE Chainguard Image for grype](/chainguard/chainguard-images/reference/grype/) based on our lightweight Wolfi distribution.
```
don't forget - we always use relative links for Academy content

Author: Good catch.

## Installation

### Container Images

> grype is readily available as a container image. To pull the low-to-no-CVE Chainguard Image for grype and perform a scan on the official Docker nginx image, run the following:

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Grype is readily available as a container image. To pull the low-to-no CVE Chainguard Image for Grype and perform a scan on the official Docker nginx image, run the following:
```

```bash
docker run -it cgr.dev/chainguard/grype nginx
```

Alternatively, you can scan using the official grype Docker image:

> ```

Reviewer: ```suggestion
```bash
```

docker run -it anchore/grype:latest nginx
```

### Binary Installation

grype provides an installation script. To use it, change the path following the `-b` flag to a preferred installation location on your system path, such as `/usr/bin`.

> ```

Reviewer: ```suggestion
```bash
```

curl -sSfL https://raw.githubusercontent.com/anchore/grype/main/install.sh | sh -s -- -b /usr/local/bin
```

Alternately, find and download the appropriate package file or binary from the [official releases page](https://github.com/anchore/grype/releases). Place the binary on your system path or install the package using the conventions for your OS and distribution.

> grype can also be [built from source](https://github.com/anchore/grype/blob/main/DEVELOPING.md#native-development).

Author: Added "note that"

### Install via Package Manager

grype can be installed using the following commands specific to your OS and distribution: 

> #### Homebrew

Author: Agree this is ugly/bad, and good catch. However, I think we should fix this on the CSS level, making h4 headings smaller than h3, and posterity will thank us. (Probably not, but they will be blissfully ignorant.)

I wrote some CSS to fix this and added it to our custom.scss file. I'll create an issue now, push the code in this PR, and resolve that issue when this goes live.

References #1628

```
brew tap anchore/grype
brew install grype
```

> #### Chocolatey

Author: It's sort of remedial package management for Windows. I think they had some issues with M$ imitating their stuff years ago, not sure how it shook out. Good project, though.

> #### Chocolatey

Author: Going to keep these, just changed the heading size in CSS.

```
choco install grype -y
```

## Basic Usage

> Throughout this tutorial, we'll use the `grype` command to run grype. If you're running grype asacontainer image, replace this command with the appropriate `docker run` command, such as `docker run -it cgr.dev/chainguard/grype`.

Reviewer: awesome note btw! This kind of note is super helpful for readers

> Throughout this tutorial, we'll use the `grype` command to run grype. If you're running grype asacontainer image, replace this command with the appropriate `docker run` command, such as `docker run -it cgr.dev/chainguard/grype`.

Author: Thanks, been to one too many workshops with confused people. :confounded:

To run grype on an image in a Docker or OCI registry, pass the image name as an argument:

```bash
grype nginx
```

> 

Reviewer: so on my second read through (the one where I'm, you know, actually reading) I see that this second command represents the "or OCI registry" part of the previous sentence. 

Maybe this just feels a little funky to me, but I think we should just have one of these commands. I would say something like:

```
To run Grype on an image, pass the name of the image as an argument to the `grype` command. The following will run Grype on the default Docker image.
```

or something

> 

Author: I went with two additional lines to clarify this :+1:

```bash
grype cgr.dev/chainguard/nginx
```

> To scan an image stored to `.tar`, pas the path to the archive file as an argument:

Reviewer: ```suggestion
To scan an image stored to `.tar`, pass the path to the archive file as an argument:
```

```bash
docker pull cgr.dev/chainguard/nginx
docker save cgr.dev/chainguard/nginx > nginx_chainguard_image.tar.gz
grype nginx_chainguard_image.tar.gz
```

> grype can scan local directories, such as Python virtual environment (venv) or `node_modules` folders.

Author: Meant folder to apply to both but this is better :+1:

```bash
python -m venv venv
./venv/bin/pip install WTForms==2.3.3 Werkzeug==2.0.1
grype venv
```

> 

Reviewer: Again, I'd break up the context and separate it out for each of the relevant code blocks

Author: OK, since this made that section longer, I added new headings for, i.e. image on registry, directory, tar, SBOM. Wrote explanatory lines for each operation (creating folders, etc).

Author: Ah, I misread your comment, but think the section is clearer now with more explanation and headings. Went in a direction of more subheadings and more explanation for the direcotry subheading. I think this is a page likely to be scanned and/or excerpted in results, so I like the heading approach for easy parsing.

```bash
mkdir node_project && cd node_project
npm init -y
npm install qs@6.5.2
grype .
```

> grype can read vulnerabilities from SBOMs generated by [syft](https://github.com/anchore/syft). SBOMs can be piped into grype using stdin:

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Grype can also read vulnerabilities from SBOMs generated by [syft](https://github.com/anchore/syft). This example also highlights you can pipe SBOMs into Grype using stdin:
```

Author: Hm, think the more direct language reads better here, but can be persuaded.

```bash
syft -o syft-json python > sbom.json
cat sbom.json | grype               
```

> 

Reviewer: This is a little nit picky but can you come up with a closing sentence for this section? We always try to avoid ending sections on a code block without any other context.

Author: I added this:

> You should see grype results based on the packages itemized in the SBOM.

I think for a subheading-heavy tutorial like this ending with code would be pretty acceptable, but I'm assuming there's a visual ugliness thing here that I'm not sensitive to.

## Comprehending Grype Output

> By default, grype output is divided into two sections, a summary of information on the scanned artifact and an itemized list of CVE.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
By default, grype output is divided into two sections: a summary of information on the scanned artifact and an itemized list of CVE.
```

>  In this section, we'll use an alpine version of the official Python image as an example. Since we're specifying a version, you may encounter more CVE when following the examples than are shown here, as CVE will accumulate over time.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
In this section, we'll use an Alpine version of the official Python image as an example. Since we're specifying an older version, you may encounter more CVEs when following the examples than are shown here, as CVEs accumulate within images over time.
```

Author: :+1:  Went with "on an image over time"

Scan the image with the following command:

```bash
grype python:3.10.14-alpine3.20
```

> You should receive output similar to the following:

Reviewer: ```suggestion
You will receive output similar to the following:
```

Author: Made the change, though I think will over should is  a touch optimistic :)

NAME           INSTALLED   FIXED-IN    TYPE    VULNERABILITY        SEVERITY 
busybox        1.36.1-r28  1.36.1-r29  apk     CVE-2023-42365       Medium    
busybox        1.36.1-r28  1.36.1-r29  apk     CVE-2023-42364       Medium    
busybox-binsh  1.36.1-r28  1.36.1-r29  apk     CVE-2023-42365       Medium    
busybox-binsh  1.36.1-r28  1.36.1-r29  apk     CVE-2023-42364       Medium    
pip            23.0.1      23.3        python  GHSA-mq26-g339-26xf  Medium    
python         3.10.14                 binary  CVE-2023-36632       High      
python         3.10.14                 binary  CVE-2023-27043       Medium    
python         3.10.14                 binary  CVE-2024-4030        Unknown   
ssl_client     1.36.1-r28  1.36.1-r29  apk     CVE-2023-42365       Medium    
ssl_client     1.36.1-r28  1.36.1-r29  apk     CVE-2023-42364       Medium
```

### Interpreting the Summary

In the initial portion of its results output, grype summarizes information on the scanned artifact and gives an overview of known vulnerabilities. In the case of a scanned image, the output includes the image digest, a unique hash of the image that can be used as an identifier. 

> Overview output includes the number of packages, files, and executables found in the artifact. Generally speaking, CVE are detected against packages, but the number of executables detected can also give you an idea of the attack surface of the scanned image or filesystem.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Overview output includes the number of packages, files, and executables found in the artifact. Generally speaking, CVEs are detected against packages, but the number of executables detected can also give you an idea of the attack surface of the scanned image or filesystem.
```

> Finally, this portion gives a count of the number of CVE detected by severity and fixed status. Severity categorization sorts CVE into four categories based on the Common Vulnerability Scoring System (CVSS).

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Finally, this portion gives a count of the number of CVEs detected by severity and fixed status. Severity categorization sorts CVE into four categories based on the Common Vulnerability Scoring System (CVSS).
```

> {{< details "What is CVSS??" >}}

Reviewer: this was nifty!

Author: Been trying to do more blurbs since it saves effort later and I like the details so that folks who know the term can skip.

{{< blurb/cvss >}}
{{< /details >}}

In our output, we can see that we have 0 critical, 1 high, and 8 medium CVEs:

```
   ├── by severity: 0 critical, 1 high, 8 medium, 0 low, 0 negligible 
```
grype also counts the number of CVE by fixed status. If a CVE is marked as fixed, it can be resolved by updating to a newer version of the package. Our output suggests that 7 packages have been fixed and can be remediated with updates:

```
   └── by status:   7 fixed, 3 not-fixed, 0 ignored 
```
### Itemized CVEs

> In addition to the summary, grype provides an itemized list of CVE. By default, these are in table format, and list the pakage name, current version, the package type (such as apt, apk, binary), and severity. If the package is fixed, grype will also indicate the package version where the fix was introduced.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
In addition to the summary, Grype provides an itemized list of CVEs. By default, these are in table format, and list the package name, current version, the package type (such as `apt`, `apk`, `binary`), and the severity. If the package is fixed, Grype will also indicate the package version where the fix was introduced.
```

Author: This had pretty bad parallel structure so cleaned it up and moved the longer item to the end. Added the monospace.

> grype writes itemized CVE to stdout, so the report of itemized CVE can easily be redirected to a file:

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Grype writes itemized CVEs to stdout, so you can redirect the report of itemized CVEs to a file:
```

Try to avoid the words "easy" or "easily" - for anything you describe as easy there will be at least someone on the internet who finds it difficult!

Author: I usually do this as well, and also avoid, for example, "just." Thanks for the catch.

```bash
grype python:3.10.14-alpine3.20 > report.txt
```

> Alternately, you can use the `--file` flag to write to a file:

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Alternatively, you can use the `--file` flag to write to a file:
```

```bash
grype --file report.txt python:3.10.14-alpine3.20
```

> Redirecting output can also be useful to suppress a long list of CVE so that the summary can more easily be viewed.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Redirecting output can also be useful to suppress a long list of CVEs, making the summary much more readable.
```

Author: Since it puts the summary front and center without changing it, went with this:

> Redirecting output can also be useful to suppress a long list of CVEs, making the summary more immediately accessible.

## Output Formats

### Standard Formats

> Itemized CVEs can be written to a number of formats, including the XML- or JSON-based [cyclonedx](https://cyclonedx.org/) SBOM standard and the [SARIF](https://sarifweb.azurewebsites.net/) static analysis format. To maximize the information provided by grype, it is recommended to use the JSON output type:

Reviewer: ```suggestion
You can use Grype to write itemized CVEs to a number of formats, including the XML- or JSON-based [cyclonedx](https://cyclonedx.org/) SBOM standard and the [SARIF](https://sarifweb.azurewebsites.net/) static analysis format. To maximize the information provided by grype, use the JSON output type:
```

Something you ought to work in is that I'm hearing a lot of passive voice in your writing. Remember: you're the expert! Feel free to just tell folks what they need to do, no need to prevaricate

```bash
 grype -o json python:3.10.14-alpine3.20 > report.json
```

When using these more detailed formats, grype provides additional useful fields, such as the data source of the CVE, URLs to information on the CVE, advisories, related vulnerabilities, and details on how the vulnerability was detected.

### Output Templates

Additional output formats are available as Hugo templates. These include output templates for HTML and CSV, and a [full list](https://github.com/anchore/grype/tree/main/templates) can be found at the grype GitHub repository.

> To generate a HTML file of the itemized CVEs, first clone the grype repository from GitHub, then provide the path to the template file in your grype command:

Reviewer: ```suggestion
To generate an HTML file of the itemized CVEs, first clone the Grype repository from GitHub. Then provide the path to the template file in your `grype` command:
```

```bash
git clone git@github.com:anchore/grype.git ~/.grype
grype -o template -t ~/.grype/templates/html.tmpl python:3.10.14-alpine3.20 > report.html
```
![Screenshot of rendered HTML generated by the included grype HTML template](grype_html_output.png)

To generate a CSV:

```bash
git clone git@github.com:anchore/grype.git ~/.grype
grype -o template -t ~/.grype/templates/csv.tmpl python:3.10.14-alpine3.20 > report.csv
```

> ## grype Explain

Reviewer: ```suggestion
## `grype explain`
```

this is a weird case, but I think rendering it as code makes sense here

Author: Yes, looks slightly odd, but it's more semantic.

grype provides an explain subcommand that gives information on the nature of a specific CVE, how it was matched, and the locations of files associated with the vulnerability. The output of this command suggests a useful starting point for remediation.

> To use grype explain, generate JSON output from grype and pipe it into the grype explain subcommand. Indicate the CVE you'd like information on using the `--id` flag. The `-q` flag in the following command suppresses the summary output.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
To use `grype explain`, generate JSON output from Grype and pipe it into the `grype explain` subcommand. Indicate the CVE you'd like information on using the `--id` flag. The `-q` flag in the following example suppresses the summary output.
```

```bash

>  grype -q python:3.10.14-alpine3.20 -o json | grype explain --id CVE-2023-36632

Author: Yes, this is a relatively new feature. But that's great, means their API is pretty stable :) Kind of feel like this subcommand is pretty marginal but figured I'd cover it.
